excavation of ten such ponds is equivalent to that of a lake, and the excavation of ten such lakes has as much effect as that of begetting a virtuous son and the birth of ten such sons has exactly the same effect as that of planting a single tree." 1

In another chapter of the same Purāṇa, details of the rites and virtues of planting trees are given : "One who plants even one tree, according to the prescribed rites, resides in heaven for 30,000 years of Indra. The planter of trees, according to the prescribed rites, liberates the same number of his past and future manes, attains to the highest perfection and is never reborn on earth''. 2

A similar eulogy on the practice is prescribed by the Agni Purāṇa : the planting of trees and the construction of pleasure gardens (for the public) are conducive to purgation of sin and enjoyment of prosperity. 3

Varāha Purāṇa enjoins that "he never goes to hell who plants an Aswattha or a Pichumanda, or a Banyan, or ten Jasmines, or two pomegranates, or five mangoes (pañchāmras). 4 A similar verse also occurs in Tithitattva where instead of Banyan, Jasmines and Pomegranates we have Champaka, Keśara, Tāla and Nārikela.

A more elaborate injunction describing the particular effects of planting particular trees by the roadside is given in the Padma Purāṇa : "Plants are like sons to a sonless man. Therefore, plant Aswattha trees with care, for it does the work of a thousand good sons. The planting, further, of Aswattha leads to prosperity; of Aśoka, to destruction of all sorrow; of Udumbara, increases (the effect of ) sacrifices, of Nimba, to longevity; of Jambaki, residence in heaven; of Dāḍima leads to the bliss of a good wife; of Dumura, to the cure of all diseases; of Palāśa, to the protection of Brahmā; of Arka, to the eternal pleasure of the Solar Deity, of Bilva, to that of Śiva, and of Pātali, to that of Pārvatī; of Śimśapā, to that of the Apsarās (female seraphim); of Kunda, to that of the Gandharvas; of Bibhītaka, to the increase of the number of servants, and of Vakula, gives maid servants. The Tāla leads to the loss of one's all children, and the Nārikela gives many wives, Drākṣā to all-round prosperity, Keli to physical pleasure, Ketaki to ruin and Plakṣa leads to permanent fame." This list practically exhausts the whole of human pleasures and pain. The same authority further tells us that, "the man planting trees (by the wayside) will enjoy bliss in

1 Chap. 154, St. 511-512.
2 Chap. 59, St. 17-20. S. B. H. 17, parts i & ii, Allahabad.
3 Chap. 70, St. 1-9. Eng. translation—M. N. Dutta, 2 Vols. Calcutta, 1904.
4 —(for text see appendix); see also J. A. S. B. 39, Part 1, 3, pp. 199-232.