heaven for as many years as there are fruits and flowers and leaves in the plant he plants¹''.

Birdwood in this connection quotes an authority which says : "The Brahmanas promise that he who plants one Aswattha, two Champakas, three Nāgakeśaras, seven Tālas, twelve Nārikelas, and devotes them with their shade, leaves, flowers, and fruits to public use, shall certainly inherit the kingdom of Heaven."²

This is no mere irrational superstition. There is a plain reason behind the practice prescribed. The Agnipurāṇa has the following explanatory verses : "The man who plants trees bearing fruits and flowers for the enjoyment of the public attains to a supreme state of bliss. The man who plants thirty trees giving shade, fruits and flowers, and ten mango trees, is not destined to go to hell. Gods, demons, angels, seraphs, and the whole of the flying fraternity, beasts, and birds and men—all receive some sort of delight through trees. The gods get pleasure through flowers, the manes through fruits, and men and birds and beasts through shade. The man who plants trees giving fragrant flowers and sweet fruits, is re-born, as a result, as a Brahmin in a respectable family enjoying prestige and wealth in a prosperous country. So one should plant such trees and look after them as if they were one's own children which, in fact, religiously speaking they are. The mortal sons are meant for purely selfish purposes whereas the 'tree-sons' serve purely altruistic ones. Leaves and flowers and fruits and shades and roots and barks and wood (timber) benefit others and bring salvation to our forefathers. One should worship trees as one worships a sage free from the vice of envy, because it provides with shade and fruits and flowers even to its very cutter. The all-giving 'tree-son', which does not bear a grudge even to its 'cutter-father' out of selfish consideration, brings about the complete salvation to the planter. So the Brahmin should always plant them with due ceremony and treat them as his sons."³

The Varāha Purāṇa observes on the same point—"A man by planting trees attains to the same bliss as he does by gift of cows and land. Just as a pious son saves the family, just as good but difficult rules followed with care save the performer from hell, so also do trees full of flowers and fruits save the planter."⁴ In the same chapter Gokarṇa says—"That (the tree) which is taken for fuel is called "agnihotra" (the sacrificial fire) ; the tree by reason of shade and rest for travellers, the nest of birds, and

1 Chap. 26, Vṛkṣaropanam.
2 Indian Arts, Part 1, pp. 85—91.
3 Chap. on .
4 Chap. on Gokarnamāhātmya.