The treatment, as might be expected in an anthology, is rather inexhaustive. The subject, however, was studied in India for centuries prior to the date of the composition of the present treatise. The Science of Plant-life, Vṛkṣāyurveda, was a distinctly comprehensive science, a branch of which dealing with the construction and maintenance of gardens, is only referred to here. It is pertinent to enquire, where is this Science—the Vṛkṣāyurveda ? It must have been there at one time, but it is, like the Dhanurveda or the Science of Archery and many other sciences, practically lost. A reconstruction at the present state of our knowledge is out of the question ; but we have significant references scattered throughout Sanskrit literature, from which it is possible to have a glimpse of it. We have elsewhere tried to show that this science existed in ancient India, and the students of Medicine and Agriculture, as now, had to study it as a necessary part of their programme.1

The science of Arbori-Horticulture, the subject of our present study, which is a comparatively new thing in the West being brought into vogue towards the middle of the 19th century was an old thing in India. It played an important part in public administration. Public parks and pleasure gardens were provided by the Government (Arthaśāstra, Śukranīti and Kāmandakīnīti) for health, recreation and enjoyment of the public.

All decent houses (Vātsyāyana's Kāmasūtra) and palaces of kings had pleasure gardens attached to them. These were well laid out, kept in perfect order, and placed in charge of well-trained experts (Ārāmādhipati). In ancient dramas and epics and amatory poems, flowers and flower gardens played important parts, and special class of artists, mālākāra and mālinī, came into being enjoying protection of the State (Śukra. II. 83).

A clear idea of the contents of the chapter and their historical and scientific importance may be formed from the conspectus given below :—

1. GLORY OF TREES

The custom of planting shady fruit trees along the public thoroughfares, or constructing gardens and consecrating them for public use has been of immemorial antiquity.2 Like many a good thing in India it received a religious sanction.

The glory of trees is proclaimed in some of the Purāṇas too, much after the manner we find here in Śārṅgadhara's treatise. Thus in the Matsya Purāṇa we read : "One who sinks a well in a place where there is scarcity of water, lives in heaven for as many years as there are drops of water in it. The effect of digging ten such wells is equivalent to the digging of one pond, and the

1 Vanaspati-Majumdar, Calcutta, 1927.
2 Sāṅkhāyana-Gṛhyasūtra, V, 3, 2, et seq (R. V. III, 8, 11). S. B. E. 29, pp. 135—136.