drained and strong gales of warm wind blow (during the greater part of the year)" 35.

Charaka gives, by way of illustration, the following list of plants characteristic of this region : Khadira, Asana, Aśwakarna, Dhava, Tiniṣa, Sallaki, Sāla, Somavalka, Vadari, Tinduka, Aswattha, Vata and Āmalakî, the predominant types being Śami, Arjuna, and Śimśapā." 6 & 7.

2. Anūpa Region (literally marshy, or swampy and watery—plants littoral, or inland)—"Mostly abounding in rivers and bordered by seas, swept by cold wind, i. e., charged with abundant moisture. The country is interspersed with rivers, banks of which are decked with—Vañjula and Vānīra. Mountains are absent from this region. The region is thickly over-grown with forests bowers, and trees in flowers encircled by verdant trees and tender creepers (inland). The land is covered with dense forests of Hintāla, Tamāla, Nārikela and Kadalī." 8.

Suśruta describes this region as the country "that contains a large number of pools, and is wooded and undulated with chains of lofty hills traversing its area, and which is impassable owing to its network of rivers and sheets of accumulated rain-water rippling before the currents of the gentle humid air." 34.

Varāhamihira mentions the following trees as growing in this region : Jambu, Vetasa, Vānīra, Kadamba, Udumbara, Arjuna, Vījapūraka, Drākṣā, Lakooca, Dāḍima, Vañjula, Naktamāla, Tilaka, Panasa, Timira and Āmrātaka—these 16 kinds of trees are the predominant species of this region."1

Amarkoṣa mentions the following plants as growing exclusively in water : Saugandhika, Kalhāra, Hallaka, Rakta-Sandhyaka, Utpala, Kubalaya, Indīvara, Kumuda, Padma, Kamala, Puṇḍarīka, Sitāmbhoja, Kokanada, Raktotpala, Vāriparṇī, Muṣākarṇī, Jalanīlī, and Śaivāla.2

3. Sādhāraṇa Region (literally the ordinary—plants mesophytes)—

Charaka says that "the region which is endued with creepers, and plants and trees of both the classes, i.e., the Vanaspatis and Vānaspatyas, is called Sādhāraṇa." 9.

According to Suśruta "a country which exhibited features common to both the aforesaid classes is called Sādhāraṇa or the Ordinary" 36.

As to the amount of rain-fall in these regions Kautilya in his Arthaśāstra mentions that 16 droṇas of rain-fall in the country of Jāṅgala (dry places), half as much more in Anūpa (moist) countries ; as to the countries which are fit for agriculture (desavāpanam)—13½ droṇas in the country of Aśmakas (Mahārāṣṭra) ; 23 in Avanti ; an immense quantity in Aparāntānam

1 Bṛhatsaṁhitā, Chap. 54, 10—11, Vol. II, p. 745 (Text).
2 Pātāla Varga 50-56 ; cf Colebrook's edition (1807), BK. I, Chap. 2, Sec. 3. 36-42.