leaves, roots and barks, etc., for drugs of bodied beings is called a "pañchayajña" (who observed the five sacrifices). It houses small animals for whom it would have been difficult to build a house. It sheds leaves to give alms, and this is how it ends its sacrifice (pañchayajña). It produces fruit twice a year which all the year round are of service to their parents (planter), and there are omens to be understood from the trees. Thus, O son, are they (the trees) to be duly planted, and so the seers know."

The Agni Purāṇa then very aptly concludes : "Therefore never cut down any tree that bears good flowers and fruits, if you desire the increase of your family, of your wealth, and of your future happiness. If a man cuts down trees near temples, chaityas and graves, famine, epidemic and drought follow. If one destroys Chiñcha trees, serious mischief to the monarch is the consequence. If one destroys a boundary tree he dies with his horses ; therefore, one should not cut down trees of the region haunted by gods. The supremely wicked man who cuts down trees and thereby stops the passage to wells, ponds and lakes gets his family degraded and even his distant relatives despatched to hell. The man who cuts down trees giving cool shade is tortured by the agents of Yama in the particularly grim region of hell known as Asipatra-forests. The man who molests or cuts down trees in the suburbs of a town goes to the fierce-looking region of hell known as Jṛmbhaṇa. If a man cares after Bilva tree it is well and good for him, otherwise danger is sure to follow. One should plant five Bilva trees if he is not to miss heaven."1

Thus the general idea underlying the whole practice is one of public utility religiously enjoined in order to make it universally understood, appreciated and followed, so much so that even in the Edicts of Aśoka this has been regarded as an act of Piety :

Rock Edict II—Provision of comforts for men and animals
"......On the roads both wells have been dug and trees planted for the enjoyment of man and beast."

Pillar Edict VII—Review of the king's measures for the propagation of the Law of Piety
(v) Thus said His Sacred and Gracious Majesty the King : On the roads I have had banyan trees planted to give shade to man and beasts ; I have had groves of mango trees planted ; at every half-Kōs I have had wells dug ; rest houses have been erected ; and numerous watering places have been provided by me here and there for the enjoyment of man and beast."2

1 Chapter on Varuṇārāmapratiṣṭhā. Cf. Varāhapurāṇa where it is said :
2 Edicts of Aśoka, V. A. Smith, 1st Edition. pp. 7-8 & 33-34.