And by the time of Manu destruction of plants came to be regarded as State offence, and in his code provision was made for its punishment (VIII, 285, 330 and 331 ; IX, 143, 145).1

The Matsya Purāṇa prescribes degree of punishment proportionate to the guilt ; thus "one who fells his master's or other's trees should be fined gold pieces ; and double the fine should be imposed on those who cut a tree near a tank, a thoroughfare, or a boundary line (91-92). Those who break fruit trees, arbours, creepers and floral plants should be fined one māsha of gold (93). Even a man chopping grass unnecessarily should be made liable to pay a fine of kārṣāpaṇa (94). Out of the fine levied for cutting trees the king should use his own discretion : he must pay the owner of the trees the price for them and the rest should go to the Royal Exchequer(95)."2

Thus the plants are glorified because of their utility. They are either sacred to some deity, or are shade-giving, or fruit-bearing, or bearing flowers which one needed for worship.

II. GOOD AND EVIL OMENS RELATING TO RESIDENCE NEAR TREES

Reference to the trees and plants which are to be avoided in gardens adjoining a house, and to trees that are to be preferred, is plentiful in ancient literature. Beginning with the earliest we find Gobhila enjoining in Gṛhyasūtra :

"Let him (householder) avoid an Aswattha tree on the east side (of his house), and a Plakṣa on the south side, Nyagrodha on the west side, and on the north side an Udumbara". 22.

"One should say that an Aswattha brings (to the house) danger from fire, one should say that a Plakṣa tree brings early death (to the inhabitants of the house), that a Nyagrodha brings oppression through (hostile) arms, that an Udumbara brings diseases to the eye". 23.

"The Aswatha is sacred to the Sun, the Plakṣa to Yama, the Nyagrodha is the tree that belongs to Varuṇa, the Udumbara to Prajāpati". 24.

"He should place those (trees) in another place than their proper ones (25) and should sacrifice to those same deities."3 26.

1 Institutes of Manu, S. B. E. 25, pp. 304, et seq ; & 459.
2 Chap. 227, sl. 91-95. S. B. H. 17 (ii), p. 245.
3 IV, 7 ; S. B. E. XXX, p. 122 ; for verse 24, cf. Padma P. Uttarākhaṇḍa where it is said—