UPAVANA-VINODA

INTRODUCTION

THE ŚĀRṄGADHARA-PADDHATI is an Anthology compiled by Śārṅgadhara. It is an encyclopædic work dealing with a variety of subjects, such as asceticism, erotics, rhetoric, medicine, politics, economics, botany, chemistry, cosmetics, criticism in general, philosophy, science of war, and so forth. It practically surveys the whole of human life in its most superficial as well as its deepest aspects. Of this an interesting chapter, Upavana-Vinoda, treating of Arbori-Horticulture, is translated in these pages.

The author of this treatise was, as is clear from the introductory verses¹, Śārṅgadhara, a courtier of king Hammīra of Śākambharī-deśa (modern Bundelkhand) who flourished in the 13th century A. D. (1283-1301). Hammīra was a powerful monarch, a great patron of learning and himself a writer.² He was defeated and killed by Alauddīn Khiliji, and had he not been a contemporary of the latter he would perhaps have figured in history as a conspicuously great monarch.³ It appears from the opening verses that the author undertook to compile the treatise at the command of his king for the benefit of his subjects.

The chapter Upavana-Vinoda from the Śārṅgadhara Paddhati, the English translation of which is offered here, deals with the following topics :—
(1) Glory of Trees, (2) Good and evil omens relating to residence near trees, (3) Selection of soil (for planting trees), (4) Classification of plants, (5) Sowing of seeds, (6) The process of planting, (7) Watering of plants (after planting), (8) The rules for the protection of plants, (9) Construction of a garden house, (10) Examination of the soil where wells (for watering) are to be dug, (11) Rules for the nourishment of plants, (12) Kūṇapa water (recipe for a nutrient solution), (13) Treatment of plants in disease and health, (14) Botanical marvels and (15) Ascertainment of the price of things.

2 Hammīra Mahākāvya of Naya Chandra Suri, Ind. Ant. VIII, pp. 55-73 (Text-ed. (N. J. Kirtone, Bombay, 1879).
3 For further information see Dr. H. Roy's Dynastic history of Northern India, Vol. II.