(Konkana), and the foot of the Himalayas. The author finally directs that "Lands that are beaten by foam (phenāghātaḥ, i.e., banks of rivers, etc.) are suitable for growing vallīphala (pumpkin, gourd and the like); lands that are frequently overflown by water (parivahanta) for long pepper, grapes (mṛdvīkā) and sugarcane; the vicinity of wells for vegetables and roots, low grounds (hariṇīparyantaḥ—moist bed of lakes) for green crops; and marginal furrows between any two rows of crops are suitable for the plantation of fragrant plants, medicinal herbs, cascus roots (uśīnāra), hīra(?) beraka (?) and piṇḍāluka (lac) and the like''.1

Our survey in this section distinctly shows that classification of soil was based on two grounds—medicinal and economic. The medical authorities, like Charaka and Suśruta, had in view the efficacy of vegetable drugs which depends on the nature of soil in which they grow. And politicians like Chāṇakya cared for the productivity of different types of soil, an attention to which is necessary on the part of a good Government to prevent famine.

IV. CLASSIFICATION OF PLANTS, AND MEANS OF PROPAGATION2
A. CLASSIFICATION

A broad classification of plants, probably based on habits, into trees, shrubs, herbs and creepers, is to be found as early as in the texts of the Ṛgveda (X. 97. 15). Charaka classifies plants into 4 orders, namely, Vanaspatis, Vānaspatyas (Vṛkṣas of Suśruta), Oṣadhis and Virudhs. Vanaspatis are trees that bear fruits without flowers; Vānaspatyas are trees that bear first flowers and then fruits; Oṣadhis are those herbs that wither after fructification, and Virudhs are herbs with spreading stems, e.g. creepers and gulmas ( ).3 Chakrapāṇi in his commentary on Charaka notes that Virudhs comprise two classes (1) Latās—creepers, and (2) Gulmas—herbs with succulent or cactaceous stems and shrubs. The Oṣadhis are subdivided into (1) annuals or perennials, bearing fruits, and (2) plants that wither away after maturing and without fructification, like the Dūrvā (grasses).

The commentator Dalvana gives us some details: The Plakṣa and the Udumbara are given as instances of Vanaspatis; the mango, the Jambu, etc., of Vṛkṣas. The Virudhs are of two classes (1) creepers with stems spreading on the ground ( ), and (2) herbs with succulent stems ( or ).

The Oṣadhis are divided into two classes: (1) those that wither away after fructification, e.g., wheat, barley, linseed, pulses, etc., ( ),

1 Chap. XXIV, 116-117, (Shyama Sastri Ed. (1915), pp. 143-145).
2 See Vanaspati, Sec. VII, for elaborate dealing of the subject, pp. 79-127.
3 Sūtrasthāna, I. 36, 37; (cf. Suśruta-Sūtrasthāna, I. 23),