Varāhamihira says that "the presence of Plakṣa, Vaṭa, Udumbara and Aswattha trees respectively in the south, west, north and east of a house forebodes evil, and if the same trees are present in order--Plakṣa being in the north, Vaṭa in the east, Udumbara in the south, and Aswattha in the west it means good to the house." 83

"Presence of thorny trees like Khadira near a house means danger from enemies, that of Kṣīra trees (trees with milky juice) loss of things, and that of fruit trees, like mango, etc., indicates loss of children (prajākṣayakara). One should not use even the wood of these trees as fuel". 84.

"If one does not want to part with these trees one should do well to plant Punnāga, Aśoka, Ariṣṭa, Vakula, Panasa, Śami and Sāla near them."1 85.

Bhaṭṭotpala in his commentary on the Bṛhatsaṁhitā quotes Garga who enjoins that "one should avoid Aswattha in the east, Plakṣa in the south, Nyagrodha in the west and Udumbara in the north (of his house), for, it is said that Aswattha (in such position) engenders fear, Plakṣa defeat, Nyagrodha illness of the king and Udumbara that of eyes. Vaṭa in front of a house is best, so are the Udumbara, Aswattha, and Plakṣa in the south, west and north of the house respectively."

Varāhamihira in another place says, "let us first of all talk of trees that should be planted in a garden, or in the house itself. Ariṣṭa, Aśoka, Punnāga, Śīriṣa, Priyaṅgu, should be planted in the garden, or in the house as preeminently conducive to the welfare of the house." Kāśyapa, another authority, adds Champaka, Udumbara and Pārijātaka to the above list and says, that they should be planted in devalayé tathodyané grhesūpavanesu cha"2 3. The Agni Purāṇa prescribes that "a Plakṣa tree planted and grown on the north of a building brings good luck to its master, whereas a Vaṭa tree on its east, an Udumbara on its south and an Aswattha on its west are possessed of similar virtues. The garden should be laid on the lefthand side of a dwelling house."3

To promote the hygienic effects of different trees and shrubs planted around the dwelling of a man the Agnipurāṇa further enjoins that "Plakṣas should be planted to the north of a dwelling house, the Vaṭas on the east, mangoes on the south, Aswattha on the west. Thorny shrubs should be so planted as to edge the southern boundary of the ground of a house. The flower garden should be laid out adjoining a dwelling house, and blooming plants or sesame should be cultivated therein."

"Tanks should be excavated in the gardens, and arms of rivers should be made to run in the same. Trees such as Ariṣṭa, Aśoka. Kadali, Punnāga, Śīriṣa,

1 Bṛhatsaṁhitā. Chap. 52. Vāstuvidyā, Vol. ii, pp. 643-705.
2 Chap. 54, Vṛkṣhāyurveda, Vol. II, p. 743. (Sanskrit original).
3 Chap. 246, English translation, pp. 889-893.