and partly in cities ; they are, however, not to be prohibited in villages and spacious towns. The wise persons should avoid by all means the air coming from them. Kharjūra and Uhu trees are forbidden in camps, but certainly not in villages and spacious towns. Trees like Champaka and rice plants are equally beneficient in villages, cities and in camps. Sugarcane, Aśoka, Śīriṣa, Kadamba are always productive of good. So also are Kacvī, Haridrā, Ārdraka and Haritakī, both in villages and in towns. The air coming from the Āmalakī tree is not always beneficient'.1

Śukrāchāryya in his Śukranīti is more practical on the subject. His general instruction on the point is : "one should lay out a fair garden to the left of the dwelling house (IV. iv, 104). He should plant those trees which bear good fruits (phalinaḥ) very near the village (IV. iv, 103)." Then he gives a long list of such phalinaḥ trees in IV. iv, 95—102. His other general instructions are to plant thorny trees (kaṇṭakinah) in forests (113-114), and expansive trees, shrubs and creepers "in villages if domestic, and in forests, if wild"2 (123-124).

In this, as well as in the sections that follow, we find that in the treatment of plants from every aspect utility is distinctly kept in view.

III. SELECTION OF SOILS

A more elaborate attention is paid to the topic of classification of soils with characteristic flora in Charaka3 and Suśruta4.

Charaka divides land into three classes, namely, Jāṅgala, Anūpa and Sādhāraṇa according to the nature of the soil (edaphic conditions) and climate (climatic conditons). Thus :

1. Jāṅgala Region (literally dry places—plants xerophytes)—"The region called Jāṅgala is full of unobstructed open spaces, where a steady and dry wind blows, pervaded with expansive mirages, rivers and rivulets scarce, abounding in (artificial) wells (i.e. scarcity of water), also abounding in dry and rough sands and big sandy particles (kankurs). 6 & 7.

Suśruta describes this region as "the country which presents a flat surface, and whose dull monotony is enlivened here and there by scanty growths of thorny shrubs, and tops of a few isolated hills and knolls, and in which the waters from springs and wells, accumulated during the rains, become nearly

1 Chap. 102, Śrīkṛṣṇa Janma khaṇḍa.
2 S. B. H. 13, pp. 165-166.
3 Kalpasthāna I, Madanaphala Kalpa, 6, 7—9; Eng. translation, Fasc. LXI, Lesson I, pp. 1917—1918.
4 Sūtrasthāna, Chap. 35, 34—42. Eng. translation by K. L. Vishagratna, Vol. II, pp. 325—326 (Calcutta, 1911).