Jambu, Vakula and Dāḍima or any other (useful) trees should be carefully planted in a garden.1''

The Matsyapurāṇa has a similar but a more elaborate prescription, thus : "A banyan tree to the east of a house is auspicious, and all desires are fulfilled ; a fig tree to the south, a pipal tree on the west and a plakṣa to the north of it brings fortune to the owner. If kaṇṭaki' (thorny) trees, milky trees, Asana trees and the straight trees be planted in the house in the above mentioned direction respectively, then it means misery to the lady of the house and her children. If one does not cut down such a growth he should plant auspicious trees near them. A house with the following trees in its vicinity is very auspicious, viz., Punnāga, Aśoka, Vakula, Śamī, Tilaka, Champaka, Dāḍima, Pippali, Drākṣā and a kusumamaṇḍapa (bower). The following trees bring prosperity and increase riches, viz., Jambīra, Pūga, Mallikā, Nārikela, Kadali and Pāṭali2" 20-24.

The Brahmavaivartta Purāṇa is more exhaustive in this respect. Thus it says "that the cocoanut tree near the dwelling house confers wealth on the family, and if on the east, or north-east of an encampment, the tree is the donor of sons ; the mango tree, the best of the trees, is auspicious at every place, and if situated in the east gives wealth to man. The Bilva, the Panasa, the Jambīra and the Vadari trees are, in all situations, conducive to prosperity, but, if in the east they give sons and, on the south, confer wealth on the owner. The Jambuka, Dāḍima, Kadalī, and Āmrātaka grown in all situations enrich the house-holder, but if grown in the east they bring friends (bandhu), and if in the south, intimate associates (mitra). They are always conductive to good, wealth and plenty of children. Betelnut, if planted in the south or in the west, leads to pleasure, and if in the north-east, comfort ; wherever planted they bring prosperity. Champakas too, wherever planted, bring in their train purity and welfare. Alābu, Kuṣmāṇḍa, Māyāmba, Sukāsaka, Kharjjura, Karkaṭī if planted in an encampment the result is great good. Vāstuka, Karabilva, Vārtāku, Valliphala, all these wherever planted yield beneficient results."

Then it gives the names of trees the planting of which should by all means be avoided. "Wild trees should not be planted either in encapments or in cities. Vata should not be planted in an encampment because it leads to danger from thieves, but it is good for cities because its very look confers virtue (on the lookers). The planting of Tintiḍī trees should be avoided with all care ; the very remembrance of it is perilous to wealth and dangerous to the life of the citizens ; they are to be totally prohibited in camp

1 Chap. 282, English translation, pp. 1037-1038.
2 Chap. 255, S. B. H. 17, ii, p. 298.